---
params:
  author: |
    Temirlan Emilbekov
    aka PulpyPuppy
    aka PuplyPuppy
    aka Son of Dragon<sup>1</sup>
  email: tamiramil@proton.me
title: Verdex and other adventures of Gumstix
date: 2026-04-04
type: post
---

Hi a-a-all my fellas!

Well, in this post we're going to talk about two things:
1. Which BSPs have graphic output support;
2. Which BSPs have been tested and what are the results.

## Graphics Supporting BSPs

Maybe, I should have told you about the decisions I've made in the GSoC proposal
but... No, there is no but, I've simply forgot about that. So perhaps this is
what the next post is going to be about.

Let's get back to the first main topic. Obviously, all the i386 BSPs do have
graphics output support. They even do have three interface implementations: VGA,
Vesa and Cirrus.

ARM is a little bit (no) messy. Firstly, raspberrypi BSPs do have the frame
buffer driver implementation, of course. The gumstix implements the FB driver as
well. The csb337 family has sed1356 controller driver with FB write
functionality. The realview-pbx-a9 and lpc24xx BSPs implement arm-pl111
controller driver. And... that's it I guess. If I'm wrong at some point,
please mail me or (if this functionality is implemented at the moment you read
this) you can leave here a comment.

| Architecture | BSP Family      | Driver / Controller |
|--------------|-----------------|---------------------|
| i386         | pc386           | VGA, VESA, Cirrus   |
| ARM          | Raspberry Pi    | Framebuffer         |
| ARM          | Gumstix         | Framebuffer         |
| ARM          | CSB337          | SED1356             |
| ARM          | RealView PBX-A9 | PL111               |
| ARM          | LPC24xx         | PL111               |

## Testing Results

Now, let's start the overview of the test results. I've been trying to build and
run [the hello_triangle][hello_triangle] on different BSPs and see how and what
they output.

### Long story short

All the six BSPs of pc386 family work fine (almost). ARM ones don't.

### Longs story long

Although all the pc386 BSPs work fine, the pc586-sse prints "FB_VEGA_RM using
command line option "--video=" to select video mode" onto the emulated screen.
I haven't investigated this yet, so if you have some considerations upon what
it even is, welcome to comments.

#### i386/pc386

Here is the command which is used to run the executable:
```
$ qemu-system-i386 -m 128 -vga std 
    -serial stdio \
    -no-shutdown -no-reboot \
    -append "--console=/dev/com1 --video=800x600-32" \
    -kernel tests/hello_triangle/rtems7-i386-pc586-sse/hello_triangle.exe \
```

The config.ini fields:
```
RTEMS_POSIX_API = True
BUILD_TESTS = True
```

#### Raspberry Pi & Raspberry Pi 2

The hello_triangle doesn't work on raspberrypi and raspberrypi2 as expected.
Nothing is outputed to be exact. Nor onto the emulated screen, nor in
console.

The fields set in config.ini for both rpi and rpi2:
```
RTEMS_POSIX_API = True
BUILD_TESTS = True
```

Here is the command line invocation I have been using for raspberrypi:
```
$ qemu-system-arm -M raspi1ap -m 512 \
    -serial stdio \
    -kernel tests/hello_triangle/rtems7-arm-raspberrypi/hello_triangle.exe
```

For raspberrypi2:
```
$ qemu-system-arm -M raspi2b -m 1024 \
    -serial stdio \
    -kernel tests/hello_triangle/rtems7-arm-raspberrypi2/hello_triangle.exe
```

Things I've tried:
- `-serial mon:stdio`
- `-append "console=/dev/tty0"`
- `-append "console=/dev/ttyS0"`
- `-append "console=/dev/ttyAMA0"`
- `BSP_START_COPY_FDT_FROM_U_BOOT = False`
- `BSP_FDT_BLOB_COPY_TO_READ_ONLY_LOAD_AREA = False`

The same behaviour with any of the above included: no output.

#### Gumstix & Verdex/Connex

Well, let's add a little bit of context in case someone except for Mr. Gedare
reads my posts. Gumstix is a family of small ARM-based system boards older than
the author. Actually, let's salute the Gumstix, the project has met its end on
the last day of 2025.

Now, about QEMU support. There is a 2012 article describing how to run Gumstix
on QEMU, which mentions that Verdex and Connex are outdated and suggests using
Overo instead. Overo is not present in QEMU 7.2, nor in QEMU 10.x. The article
is from 2012, which means QEMU 1.x. Plot twist: it is not present in QEMU 1.x
either. Maybe I do something wrong.

So, Verdex and Connex it is.

The command used to run the executable on Verdex:
```
$ dd if=/dev/zero of=flash.img bs=1M count=32
$ qemu-system-arm -M verdex -m 128 \
    -no-reboot -no-shutdown \
    -pflash flash.img \
    -device loader,file=hello_triangle.exe,cpu-num=0 \
    -serial stdio \
    -display sdl
```

Note the `-device loader` flag instead of `-kernel`. This is because `-kernel`
on Verdex does not work as expected: QEMU starts executing from address
`0x00000000`. The `-device loader` flag loads the executable properly and jumps
to the entry point.

The good news: the `fbskyeye` driver initializes successfully, the framebuffer
opens, and ioctl returns correct screen dimensions (640x480). The bad news:
there is no visible output. The FB driver implementation of Gumstix opens the FB
with half-height. I don't know why yet and I don't know if this is the crux but
nothings is drawn on the emulated screen. The screen is also invoked with
half-height: 640x240 instead of 640x480.

```
WARNING: Image format was not specified for 'flash.img' and probing guessed raw.
         Automatically detecting the format is dangerous for raw images, write operations on block 0 will be restricted.
         Specify the 'raw' format explicitly to remove the restrictions.
FBSKYEYE -- driver initializing..


*** HELLO TRIANGLE TEST ***
FBSKYEYE open called.
FBSKYEYE ioctl called, cmd=17920
fbskyeye close called.
*** END OF HELLO TRIANGLE TEST ***

[ RTEMS shutdown ]
RTEMS version: 7.0.0.b09bc60067efd921ee199f4241555151833d42d9
RTEMS tools: 15.2.0 20250808 (RTEMS 7, Build 2026.03.04, RSB 00a71896204f95cb583e6271cad4c192b62cce6d, Newlib a7c61498)
executing thread ID: 0x0a010001
executing thread name: UI1
```

I also tried another approach with Connex:
```
$ dd if=/dev/zero of=flash.bin bs=4096 count=4096
$ arm-rtems7-objcopy -O binary hello_triangle.exe hello_triangle.bin
$ dd if=hello_triangle.bin of=flash.bin bs=4096 conv=notrunc
$ qemu-system-arm -M connex \
    -drive if=pflash,file=flash.bin,format=raw \
    -no-reboot -no-shutdown \
    -serial stdio
```

But this one doesn't work at all. I mean it runs, but nor graphic neither
console output.

According to the canons of the genre there was also a funny (no) debugging
session involving `RTEMS_FATAL_SOURCE_INVALID_HEAP_FREE` which turned out to be
caused by `#define PGL_ARGB32` telling PortableGL to use 32-bit pixels while the
Gumstix framebuffer is 16BPP. I've wasted the whole day on this X(

See ya.

---

1. If this sounds ridiculous, well, that's because it is, but you’ll just have
to forgive me for that.

[hello_triangle]: https://github.com/PulpyPuppy/portablegl-rtems-demo/tree/master/tests/hello_triangle
